---
layout: post
title: "Beyoncé's HOMECOMING: Film, film, and video"
date: 2019-04-29 02:00:00 -0500
---

What would this blog be, if not a platform waiting to look extra extra closely
at Beyoncé music videos? And [now on Netflix is a 2+ hour
film](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homecoming_(2019_film)) ready for
consumption!

First, here are links to my previous blog posts on this subject, probably my
most popular blog posts of all time:

- [Format-ion: Video playback errors in Beyoncé’s latest music video](https://bits.ashleyblewer.com/blog/2016/02/09/format-ion-video-playback-errors-in-beyonces-latest-music-video/)
- [Aspect Ratios in LEMONADE, Pt. 1](https://bits.ashleyblewer.com/blog/2016/04/29/lemonade/)
- [Aspect Ratios in LEMONADE, Pt. 2](https://bits.ashleyblewer.com/blog/2016/05/24/aspect-ratios-in-lemonade/)

Again, I am going to try to not get into hypothesing the WHY these artistic
choices were made, but focus on the HOW. But briefly, I want to say it's no
surprise that Beyoncé seems so preoccupied with working with different moving
image mediums. Her career started when she was 15 (or earlier, but I'll cite her
self-appraised ascent to Diva status: "Since 15 in my stilettos, been struttin'
in this game"), which would be circa 1997 (and citing HOMECOMING, her 22-year
career). In 1997, shooting film was still the professional standard, with video
as the consumer standard. So over her career, she's had to work in film, analog
video, digital video on tape (DV), and so many digital video formats. And so
much of HOMECOMING is about that 22-year career, everything that inspires her
past and present, and a celebration of Black excellence -- something that is
comparitively missing from being documented within our collective cultural
heritage on these older mediums.

Shout out to the [National Museum of African American History &
Culture](https://nmaahc.si.edu/), especially the wonderful team working on [
The Great Migration Home Movie
Project](https://nmaahc.si.edu/explore/initiatives/great-migration-home-movie-project)
for working to mitigate this.

More credits first!

The HOMECOMING credits name three full-time archivists responsible for the
long-term preservation and access to this extremely prolific career. This
documentary could not have been done without them, and Formation and LEMONADE
could not have been done without them. They are absolutely essential to being
able to produce these works, and I don't personally know but I feel confident
that they also played an important role in helping Beyoncé and her production
company understand the pros and cons of working with film and video, not just
with regards to handling the past but also working in the present. I can't
imagine the knowledge they are all holding, but like with everyone involved in
Parkwood, from day-to-day employees to Coachella production support, "They
trying to party with the Queen, they're gonna have to sign a non-disclosure."
But think of and thank all of them, particularly the director, who has basically
(AFAIK) built the archive from the ground up, every time you watch this film. I
hadn't acknowledged them really in previous blog posts because I'm always trying
to be careful around public versus private knowledge, but now it's all out there.

Okay! I promised to stay in my lane, so lets get in it.

## Film and Film

Watching HOMECOMING, there are scenes from two Coachella nights spliced
together, with probably a dozen (if not more) cameras focusing on capturing the
event. But what I didn't expect to see was two people shooting Super 8 right
alongside the HD digital video! I went back and forth wondering if these were
real or done in post later, but I got my answer less than halfway through when I
could spy a Super 8 cameraperson in the reverse shot immediately after a Super 8
scene. But I have suspicions about some of the "Super 8" footage... which I'll
get to later.

![img](/images/bey4/caught.jpg)

This is right in the middle of the film, at the beginning of "Don't Hurt
Yourself," if you want to catch it for yourself. The cameraperson is also
holding something in their mouth, maybe the most recent or next reel, since
Super 8 only captures a few minutes per roll and I can't imagine how many rolls
must have been used during the course of this concert.

I'm asserting that it is Super 8 due to the film sprockets being directly in the
middle of each frame, unlike standard 8 film, which has them at the frame line.

Tangeantial fun fact: the [music video for "Flaws and
all"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iK9Iio7WgaI) was made on Super 8.

To me, it's amazing to see how far technology has come, being able to watch the
same concert with 1960s amateur film technology alongside the latest
professional equipment in 2019. I think these two shots really show it well:

![img](/images/bey4/air1.jpg)
![img](/images/bey4/air2.jpg)

Especially the HD digital video being simultaneously streamed onto massive
screens that are also visible in the shot.

What helped me understand which footage was genuine and which was fake was the
dirty lens marks (on the top right) that appear later in the show, and the
blurred focus on people at a long distance or when zooming in without adjusting
the focus, like this frame shows.

![img](/images/bey4/blurry-zoom.jpg)

Also, the Super 8 footage doesn't handle blinking lights as well as digital.
Super 8 is limited to 18 or 24 frames per second, and I have no idea what modern
digital cameras shoot at these days, or what the target playback
frames-per-second rate is for streaming video -- the concept of frame still
exists in digital video but it gets much muddier when working with adaptive
streaming video. It's a different beast in a lot of ways.

I think there are times when they wanted to use some handheld camera footage
that was shot with a digital camera, but maybe thought it would look better
styled as small-gauge film to make the wobbliness more forgiving. Here's a shot
and a reverse shot showing the difference. This is kind of an exaggerated
difference -- there are Super 8 shots that look really excellent, but these are
two side-by-side extreme examples of authenticity versus non-authenticity.  

![img](/images/bey4/frame1.jpg)
![img](/images/bey4/frame2.jpg)

## Film

There are scenes that are cut in a 4:3 aspect ratio, black and white, with
rounded corners. I think some of these are digital video with a filter over
them, but looking closely at some of the travel/bus footage, I think the film
grain is very apparent and very authentic. I particularly like this shot below,
and on the very top left corner there is some smudgy dots that move with the
camera. I think this is probably real and 16mm (because of the shape of the
camera and the feel of the grain).

![img](/images/bey4/bus.jpg)

The following scenes here seem to be half taken with this camera, and half the
aforementioned digital video styled in post. I think the interview clips,
especially, were originally digital. Also looking very closely at the edges, I
see what looks like digital artifacting -- a sort of digital grain caused by
editing and compression.

Everything is going to get colorgraded in post-production by exceptionally
talented people but I think the film just comes out warmer overall. The lights
and sequins shine more brightly (even if just because they are oversatured and
the camera can't handle any nuance). I think it's something that people say and
that I knew (that film feels richer and warmer, the same language used for vinyl
versus every other way to listen to music), but it's rare to see footage from
the same era but from different mediums presented alongside each other like this.

Here's one of the few shots with a film light leak during the practice sessions
(and some dirt specks, a few frames after):

![img](/images/bey4/light.jpg)

## Video

New VHS was being captured in 2018 during the practice sessions,too! The big
tell-tale of VHS is the [head-switching
noise](https://bavc.github.io/avaa/artifacts/head_switching_noise.html) at the
very bottom of the frame, although sometimes it is cropped out. If it has been
cropped to fill the entire screen, which it is in some scenes, it definitely
won't be visible. But what I like about a lot of the VHS footage taken and
featured in this film during practice scenes is the absolute graininess of it,
but a graininess very distinct from film grain. Grainy isn't really even the
right word, I'd maybe think of it as lumpy. The color is inconsistent,
especially in poor lighting conditions, which much of the practice space
probably was.

![img](/images/bey4/video.jpg)

And there's not a lot of VHS from the concert itself, but there is a little bit:

![img](/images/bey4/video2.jpg)

There are many more video clips from practice sessions, but the best way to see
them is to watch HOMECOMING yourself, stopping at each tiny clip and learning
how to "read" video and film for yourself! Or check out my other blog posts for
more details into film and video errors and how to identify them -- I didn't
want to rehash them all here.

Am I wrong, am I right? [Let me know!](https://www.twitter.com/ablwr)!
